Hey you guys.
Welcome to lecture 43.
This lecture we'll be going over
groupby in a little more detail and
how to use it on a dictionary and
on a series.
All right, so
we're gonna import the usual.
You can either copy and
paste this or just type it out.
NumPy as np, pandas as np,
and then, from pandas
import series, and
DataFrame to import and it's good.
All right, awesome.
So let's learn how to use
a dictionary system with groupby.
So, first thing I'm gonna
do is make a data frame.
Let's call this data frame animals.
There's my data frame.
It's gonna be some random numbers,
so let's just make it.
Well, actually let's make
it a range of numbers.
Let's say, np arrange will have
16 numbers and we're going to
reshape this into a 4 by 4 matrix.
So those will be our values.
Our columns,
we're just gonna have letter columns,
so we'll say W, X, Y, and Z.
And then our index will
just be some animals.
So we'll say a dog, we'll have a cat
index, we'll say a bird, and then mouse.
Okay so that's our data frame.
Let's check it out.
Animals, all right.
So now I'm gonna add some
null valuables to this.
So to do that I'm gonna say animals.ix.
So, let's say through one and two
on the w and y columns.
I'm gonna say those values
set them equal to null.
Okay, let's do that, and
now let's see animals.
So what we should expect is on cat,
yep here we go, that W and Y are null.
Okay and you can choose whatever null
values you want to replace with null.
So let's say I had a dictionary
with behavior values in it.
How could I use that?
So lets make a dictionary and
call it behavior map,
and we're gonna be creating
a dictionary for this so
I'm gonna say W let's set that to good.
Let's set X to bad behavior.
We'll set Y to be good as well.
And we'll set Z to be bad.
All right, so
now we have our behavior map dictionary.
We're letting each of the columns
either a good or a bad behavior.
And now we can say animal
underscore col, let's make another object.
So we'll make a group by object and
say that's going to be equal to animals.
And we're going to group that data
frame using that behavior mapping.
And we're going to schedule
along access equal to one.
And then let's say animal
column let's get the sum.
So show the sum according to the group
by using that mapping we just did.
Okay, so what do we have here?
We have dog, cat, bird, and mouse, and
now we have a bad and a good column.
So what this was is it
summed up all the values
that were good and bad for
each of the index rows.
So for instance let's take
a look at bad dog and good dog.
So, bad dog, well, for
good dog, we have two there.
So, that should've been equal to the good
values, and the good values were W and Y.
So, let's look at W and Y for dog.
So, W for dog was zero and
Y for dog was two.
So if you sum up the quote unquote
good values on that behavior map for
the dog you'll get two, zero plus two.
And then for bad the X and the Z you'll
get one plus three which is four.
And it did that for all the index for
dog, cat, bird, and mouse.
Cat being null since there
was no good cats and
I may have done that on purpose
since I don't like cats.
Anyways, let's try it with a series now.
So, we'll make a behave series
And we're gonna make a series
out of behavior map.
And then let's go ahead and
show that behave series.
All right,
behav I guess cuz I forgot the e.
So now we have our map.
The W was good, X was bad,
Y was good, Z is bad.
So that's our series out
of that dictionary and
now let's groupby the series.
So let's take our data frame,
animals, and we're gonna say groupby
that series, and again,
do it along access equal to 1.
And now let's count.
So now we're gonna count the total
of bad and good instances for
each animal based on that series.
So, now we get two and two for
dog since it's just doing
accounting not summing of them.
So let's show our d frame again.
Sorry, our data frame is called animals.
There we go.
Okay, excellent.
So what does that mean?
That means the dog had two instances
on the bad columns and two instances on
the good columns since it was counting.
Lets assume that we wanted to groupby
the length of the animal names.
So we can just pass the length
function into groupby.
So this is going to be a really
interesting thing we can do with groupby.
So look at the animals, look at the length
as far as characters of each index.
So dog and cat are three letters long,
bird is four letters long, and
mouse is five letters long.
So we can say animals groupby and
that's gonna take the length of each
index and then we can get the sum.
All right, so now our index is
the number of letters in the animal name
and then it's summed up, those guys.
For instance, if we look at
index that's 3, that summed up
the column values for
the 3 letter animal names, dog and cat.
So, let's look at Dog x was 1,
cat x was 5.
And now, since we grouped it by
the length of the animal name,
5 plus 1 on that x column equals 6.
And it's done that for each of the column
values, and bird and mouse as well,
since they were four letters long and
five letters long respectively.
We can also mix functions with arrays,
dictionaries, and
series for groupby methods.
So let's check that out.
We can say get a set of keys.
So I'm gonna make a list for this.
I'm gonna say a, b,
a, b, so I have my keys.
And now I'm gonna groupby length of name
and the keys to show the max values.
So I'll say animals.groupby, and
then I'll groupby the length,
and those keys,
and I'm gonna find the max values for
each of those.
So what has it done here?
It's set that key list onto that previous
data frame we had, it's pushed it onto it.
So now that index of three now
has a sub index of A and B and
then it's found the max values for
each of those cases on every column.
Great, so we can use groupby
with index hierarchy levels.
So let's create
a hierarchical column index.
So we'll say hier_col = pd Multiindex,
and then we can call
the method from_ arrays,
so this will allow us to
build a multi-column,
or issue a multi-list, excuse me.
So let's say we want some city's initials,
since we've been doing that a lot, NY,
NY, make NY again, and then let's have
the last two be SF for San Francisco.
And then we're gonna pass a list of lists
so let's add another list in there.
This one will just be numbers.
We'll say, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2.
All right, so that's our list of two lists
and then for this we'll name each index.
So the names of the index,
we can pass through argument names and
we'll say it was the city.
And then the second one we'll just
give it a generic name, sub values.
This is just some numbers 1, 2, 3, 1, 2.
So let's make that,all right?
Now let's create a data frame
from that high article index.
We'll say data frame_HR for
hierarchy is a data frame.
We'll pass let's say a 5 by 5 matrix so
I'll create a ranged.
I'm gonna reshape this to be 5 and 5 and
then I'll set my columns
equal to the index hierarchy.
Cool.
And now what I'm gonna do,
I'm gonna day dframe_hr = dframe_hr * 100.
So what that's gonna do,
it's gonna multiply every object in that
DataFrame by 100 and I do that for
clarity reasons later on.
Just so it's really obvious that
you have a 0, 100, 200, 300, 400,
all the way to 24.
So now we have a hierarchy index,
top index is cities NY SF.
That sub-index is 1, 2, 3, 1, 2 and
then we have our index on the side.
So we have the column index and
the regular index.
So that's what you can use groupby.
We have those data frames, and
you can use groupby on them as well.
So you can use multi index from arrays
to build a hierarchical index for
your data frame.
That's about it for this.
You can check out
the documentation on groupby if you
wanna know some more details on it.
We'll continue using it
throughout the course so
if you don't feel 100% on it you'll still
have way more chances to see it again.
All right, up next we're gonna
learn about data aggregation.
I'll see you there.